---
layout: post
title: The Trie
categories: [algorithms, data structures, trie]
keywords: C++, data structures, trie
external-url: https://dotkay.github.io/2018/03/21/trie-two
---

In a [previous post](https://dotkay.github.io/2018/03/18/trie-one) we started with some motivation for the need of a tree like data structure for efficient prefix matching. We will see how to implement Trie in C++ in this post.

Trie is a tree data structure made up of nodes that contain some data. So, we need to design a structure for the nodes and some structure fields for storing the data. Since we are talking about prefix strings and strings are made up of characters, we can think of a node as having a hashmap, storing the prefix character and a reference to the Trie node holding the remaining characters (children nodes). We can go about defining a structure like this:

{% highlight cpp %}
struct Trie
{
  std::unordered_map<char, Trie*> lookup;
  bool isLeaf;
};
{% endhighlight %}

The boolean variable `isLeaf` is to indicate the end (leaf node) of the string in the Trie. And when we start populating a new Trie, we need to allocate a new structure, something like the following `newTrieNode()`. We set the `isLeaf` to `false` as we need to set this to `true` only for leaf nodes.

{% highlight cpp %}
Trie* newTrieNode()
{
  Trie* node = new Trie;
  node->isLeaf = false;
  return node;
}
{% endhighlight %}

We can also write a small function to check if a node has any children (by checking the value of `isLeaf`).

{% highlight cpp %}
bool hasChildren(Trie* const curr)
{
  for (auto it : curr->lookup)
    if (it.second != nullptr)
      return true;
  return false;
}
{% endhighlight %}

We will look at populating a Trie by inserting characters from a string into the Trie, as well as searching for a prefix in a future post.